\section{Conclusions}
This study investigated whether the cross-sectional dispersion of realized volatility across market sectors can serve as a leading indicator for shifts in the CBOE Volatility Index (VIX). The central problem addressed was the inherent ambiguity in such dispersion metrics: whether they represent benign, idiosyncratic sector-specific noise or a symptom of rising market fragility that precedes systemic turmoil. We hypothesized that the predictive power of dispersion is not absolute but is conditional on the market's broader correlational structure.

To test this, we constructed a daily Sectoral Volatility Dispersion (SVD) metric using data from nine major US sector ETFs from 2015 to 2026. We employed a three-state Hidden Markov Model to endogenously classify VIX regimes and used Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) and logistic regression models to assess the predictive power of SVD. The OLS model included a key interaction term between SVD and the average cross-sector correlation to test our conditional hypothesis.

Our empirical results deliver a clear and nuanced conclusion. We found that SVD, when considered in isolation, is not a statistically significant predictor of future VIX innovations or the probability of transitioning into a high-volatility state. A logistic regression model designed to time these regime shifts performed poorly, with an AUROC of just 0.526, indicating its ineffectiveness as a standalone warning signal. However, our central finding, derived from the OLS regression, reveals a significant conditional relationship. At a 21-day forecast horizon, the interaction between SVD and average sector correlation was found to be a statistically significant predictor of VIX innovations.

From these results, we have learned that the informational content of sectoral volatility dispersion is context-dependent. An increase in SVD is associated with significantly higher future market volatility only when it is accompanied by a breakdown in the market's internal cohesion, as measured by low average cross-sector correlation. When sectors remain highly correlated, high dispersion does not signal impending systemic risk. This study clarifies that cross-sectional dispersion should not be interpreted as a simple, unconditional timing tool. Instead, it is a critical component of a more sophisticated indicator of market fragility, where the simultaneous occurrence of high idiosyncratic volatility and the decoupling of market sectors signals a heightened vulnerability to future market-wide stress.